Add post mortem for Sept. 3, 2020 (#268)
openSUSE/obs-landing: _posts/deployments/2020-09-03-post-mortem.md

---
layout: post
title: "Post-Mortem: Search Unavailable on September 3, 2020"
category: deployments
---

The search of the <https://build.opensuse.org> OBS instance was unavailable for
10 minutes, outside of our maintenance window.  We want to give you some insight
into what happened.

- **Date**: 2020-09-03
- **Authors**: Dany

## Summary

After a deployment, the search process running on our server crashed after we've
attempted to fix an issue in our this process is tracked and monitored. The
search was unavailable for 10 minutes.

## Impact

> Nobody could search.

Reviewer: I will also add that every part of the application that required a callback to update the Sphinx indices, returned a 500 error. That gave the false impresion to the users that something was really wrong with OBS, when only the update to the Sphinx indices was affected.

And until the reindex procces was finished, searching for some terms didn't return all the results expected.

Author: True, I will add this.

for Sphinx (our search engine) couldn't restart. The searchd process was still
running, but somehow, the PID file of the systemd service didn't exist. Instead
of leaving this in this problematic state, we fixed it, but also caused issues
while doing so.

## Trigger

We were able to restart the systemd service after creating the missing PID file
referring to the searchd process. However, at 14:31 (CEST), the systemd service
stopped when the searchd process crashed and couldn't be restarted.

## Resolution

The search was available again and we had to reindex the search indices to be
sure no changes to packages and projects during the search downtime were
missing.

## Detection

We got errors about the search being down in our errors tracker.

## Action Items

- https://trello.com/c/2F0URe6h/2021-identify-why-the-obs-sphinx-systemd-service-cannot-restart-after-a-deployment

## Lessons Learned

### What Went Well

We were quickly aware of the issue with the help of our errors tracker.

### What Went Wrong

We couldn't restart the systemd service after the searchd process crashed since
searchd left out files which we had to remove.

> 

Reviewer: These left out files we had to remove, were created by starting up the daemon with a direct call to the Sphinx daemon, as root. We should have started the daemon with the `systemctl start obs-sphinx.service` command.

Author: In the heat of the moment, I didn't remember exactly why it was the case. I will explain this better.

---
layout: post
title: "Post-Mortem: Search Unavailable on September 3, 2020"
category: deployments
---

The search of the <https://build.opensuse.org> OBS instance was unavailable for
10 minutes, outside of our maintenance window.  We want to give you some insight
into what happened.

- **Date**: 2020-09-03
- **Authors**: Dany

## Summary

After a deployment, the search process running on our server crashed after we've

> attempted to fix an issue in our this process is tracked and monitored. The

Author: Oh right, `in our this` should be `in how this process`

search was unavailable for 10 minutes. Errors also happened whenever updating
projects and packages due to a tight integration with the search engine.

## Impact

Nobody could search. Any code updating the search indices through callbacks

> caused errors (500) while the search was down. Project and package pages were

Reviewer 2: We know how many people where affected by this?

Author: I don't remember the exact number, I think we had about 200 errors in Errbit.

affected by this. Once it was back, we had partial search results while we
reindexed the search.

## Root Causes

After a deployment on September 3, 2020 at 13:57 (CEST), the systemd service
for Sphinx (our search engine) couldn't restart. The searchd process was still
running, but somehow, the PID file of the systemd service didn't exist. Instead
of leaving this in this problematic state, we fixed it, but also caused issues

> while doing so.

Reviewer 2: So the root cause is `sphinx` crashing during the deployment, leaving behind unclean state.

## Trigger

We were able to restart the systemd service after creating the missing PID file
referring to the searchd process. However, at 14:31 (CEST), the systemd service

> stopped when the searchd process crashed and couldn't be restarted.

Reviewer 2: This is not the trigger. What made sphinx crash?

---
layout: post
title: "Post-Mortem: Search Unavailable on September 3, 2020"
category: deployments
---

The search of the <https://build.opensuse.org> OBS instance was unavailable for
13 minutes, outside of our maintenance window.  We want to give you some insight
into what happened.

- **Date**: 2020-09-03
- **Authors**: Dany and Henne

## Summary

> After a deployment, the searchd process running on our server crashed after
> we've attempted to fix an issue in how this process is tracked and monitored.
> The search was unavailable for 13 minutes. Errors also happened whenever
> updating projects and packages due to a tight integration with the search
> engine.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
On 2020-08-27 we fixed an issue with our search indexes that required us to rebuild them. We did so and everything was running fine. Then on 2020-09-03 we noticed after a deployment that the search service did not start successfully. During our attempt to mitigate this, we destroyed the search indexes again which lead to this service degradation. The search was unavailable for 13 minutes. User visible errors also happened whenever projects and packages where created/updated due to a tight integration of those object with the search engine.
```

## Impact

Nobody could search. Any code updating the search indices through callbacks
caused errors (500) while the search was down. Project and package pages were
affected by this. Once it was back, we had partial search results while we
reindexed the search.

## Root Causes

> We rebuilt the search indices as root on August 27th, 2020 at 8:09 (CEST).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To fix issue [#9436](https://github.com/openSUSE/open-build-service/issues/9436) we rebuilt the search indices August 27th, 2020 at 8:09 (CEST). Unfortunately we ran this command as the user `root`.
```

## Trigger

> After deploying on September 3, 2020 at 13:57 (CEST), we noticed that the
> systemd service for the search couldn't restart. We found out that the search
> indices were created as root. This created files as root and the searchd process
> couldn't be managed by its systemd service. We created a PID file for the
> systemd service in an attempt to have the systemd service manage the process,
> but it made the searchd process crash.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After deploying on September 3, 2020 at 13:57 (CEST), we noticed that the searchd systemd unit couldn't restart. While trying to mitigate this we removed search indexes (that also had wrong ownership) which caused the searchd service to fail. 
```

## Resolution

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After a while we noticed that there was a searchd process running that was not controlled by the unit.
```

We had to restart the searchd process as root, then gracefully stop it to have
all remnants from the previous process removed. We then started the systemd
service for the search. We had to rebuilt the search indices, but this time, as
the right user in the context of our application.

## Detection

We got errors about the search being down in our errors tracker.

## Action Items

- Running `bundle`, `rails` and `rake` as root does nothing now, beside emitting
  a warning on how to run those commands as the right user in the context of our
  application.
- Prevent errors from callbacks when Sphinx's daemon is down: https://trello.com/c/AXOe6AGO/2022-prevent-errors-when-sphinxs-daemon-is-down

## Lessons Learned

### What Went Well

We were quickly aware of the issue with the help of our errors tracker.

### What Went Wrong

> We weren't notified about the failure of systemd service for the search. This
> prevented us from knowing that we made a mistake by indexing the search as root.
> We also had to rebuild the search indices.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- We don't guard ourselves against running "standard" Ruby on Rails commands in production as the wrong user
- Our monitoring for the search service is not sophisticated enough
- The integration of the ActiveRecord callbacks and searchd is too fragile
- We removed search indices without thinking about the consequences
```

### Where We Got Lucky

The issue was quite severe, but not the whole application went down with it.

## Timeline (times in CEST)

> - **2020-08-27 08:09**: We rebuild the search indices as root, which created files for search indices as root

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **2020-08-27 08:09**: We rebuild the search indices as root, which started searchd as root and created search indices as that user
```

> - Everything was working

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Everything was seemingly working fine. However, the `searchd` systemd unit was failing which we don't monitor. We only monitor for the existence of a process named `searchd`
```

- **2020-09-03 13:57**: Deployment
- **13:59**: We notice that the systemd service of the search failed to start
- **14:00**: We notice a dangling searchd process
- **14:25**: We create a PID file in an attempt to have the systemd service
    manage the dangling process

> - **14:34**: We notice wrong file permissions on the search indices. The searchd
>     process crashes. **The search is down**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **14:34**: We notice wrong file permissions on the search indices and a message about this in the searchd logs
```

> - **14:40**: We remove the files for the search indices

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **14:40**: In an desperate attempt, we remove the indices. **The search is down**
```

- **14:47**: We start the searchd process as root again, **the search is no longer down**

> - **14:57**: We stop the searchd process gracefully

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **14:57**: We stop the searchd process gracefully, which briefly degrades the service again.
```
